Private DNS zone
it could be linked to one or more vnets

Private Endpoints
Azure services like keyvault, sql, storage account, app service and acr are by default exposed publicly through public endpoint. 

PE is a network interface that uses a private ip address from your vnet. this NIC connects you privately and securely to a service that's powered by azure private link. the service then only be available with vnet and public access will be disabled(not automatically). 

PE uses a private ip. but we can create private domain name using private dns zone

when we create PE for paas service, two resources will be created. first is PE itself and NIC assigned with private ip from vnet is created and attached to PE

you specify vnet & subnet while creating PE. it creates NIC and attaches to the subnet. 

VNET service endpoint
provides pvt n/w access to azure resources
the compute resources connect to the public ip of azure services
this endpoint connects over an optimized route using azure backbone network
the compute resources on the pvt vnet use this pvt ip as source address when connecting to azure services
works only for outbound traffic. no inbound

how does it work?
subnet - enable service endpoint for specific azure service like storage account
go to storage account - networking - public network access - enable select vnet access - select your subnet

compared to private endpoint, it uses public ip of service only though the traffic goes over azure backbone n/w.
PE traffic flows entirely through vnet using private ip. no public ip involved. 

PE is preferred over service endpoint. 

Private Link Service (PLS)
PE is powered by PLS
To enable private access to azure paas services through PE, that paas service should support PLS
we can access paas services and customer services over PE in vnet
we can also create our own PLS in vnet and deliver it to customers
your service will run behind standard LB
with private link access, customers can access to your service privately from their own vnets. 
service provider - vmss -> internal LB -> PLS
customer side - VM -> PE for PLS. this PE is connected to PLS service 
PLS service can be accessed from approved PE in any public region
PE can be reached from same or peered vnet or onprem using vpn & express route. 
it must be deployed in the same region as the vnet & standard LB
can be accessed from multiple PE belongs to different vnets, subscriptions or tenants
the customer n service provider could be in different regions

service endpoints/PE are like providing internal access to azure resources
whereas PLS is like providing internal access for our own application running behind standard LB
PLS is like creating our app as azure services. we attach PE to that service to enable private access 
whichever vnet & subnet has this PE attached, can access our private app.  
