Loki is a log aggregation system designed to store and query logs
cost effective and easy to operate
loki doesn't index full text from logs like elasticsearch - loki only indexes labels(metadata) from logs

Loki agents needs to be installed on all the servers from where you want the logs - Promtail or Fluentd or Logstash.

Agents grab the logs from the server and streams them into loki instance. whatever the labels we specify in the agents, we can search the logs based on that labels in grafana. because it only indexes labels. storage options - local file system or s3 storage

LogQL - query language to interactive with loki to get the logs

install loki
download loki, unzip it. download config file for loki - loki-local-config.yaml - in this config file, loki listener port and storage path is defined. by default its running on 3100 and storage is local file system.
run the loki executable with config file
./loki-linux-amd64 -config.file=loki-local-config.yaml
check its working by running http://ip:3100/metrics - metrics exposed by the loki server

if we want to collect logs from individual nodes, install promtail on all of the nodes
download promtail executable along with its config file. in promtail config file, we have promtail listening port which is 9080 and we have client which is the url of the loki server. update this url on where loki is running by specifying ip and port. along with this we have scrape config.
here we have job name, target and labels (metadata) key value pairs for index and it has path which specifies from which path it has to collect logs.
if you want to collect logs from more than one location, add more jobs.
run promtail using
./promtail-linux-amd64 -config.file=promtail-local-config.yaml

verify loki is collecting the logs by adding loki in grafana data source. go to explore and select data source as loki and search for logs

To collect logs from apps running on k8s,
first install loki instance on k8s cluster. but it could be installed outside of the k8s cluster as well. grafana dashboard also we can deploy outside k8s cluster or within the k8s cluster.
promtail needs to be installed on each node since its collecting logs from all the pods running on that node and sending it to loki. for that we use daemonsets.

Helm chart is there to install loki, grafana and promtail in cluster
helm repo add grafana grafana-chart-url
helm repo update
help search repo loki - it lists all the different loki charts - loki, loki-canary, loki-distributed, loki-simple-scalable, loki-stack, fluentbit and promtail
loki-stack - deploys loki, grafana dashboard and promtail on all the nodes

get helm chart values using
helm show values grafana/loki-stack > values.yaml - it has loki configuration enabled, promtail configuration enabled, fluentbit and grafana disabled by default. we can enable it if we want.
helm install --values values.yaml loki grafana/loki-stack
kubectl get all
it has deployment for grafana dashboard, daemonset for promtail and statefulset for loki and respective services for all of them
this chart also adds loki as datasource in grafana

by default all services are with cluster ip type. we can change it into nodeport or ingress to access the grafana dashboard - svcip:3000
for grafana dashboard password, check the k8s secret
kubectl describe secret loki-grafana
kubectl get secret loki-grafana -o jsonpath="{.data.admin-password}" | base64 --decode

get promtail config values file
kubectl get pod
kubectl describe po loki-promtail - see the mounts /etc/promtail from config - config is a secret volume. let's check the secret. secret name loki-promtail
kubectl get secret loki-promtail -o jsonpath="{.data.promtail\.yaml}" | base64 --decode > promtail-helm-values.yaml - here is the promtail values file - servers - where promtail is running, client - where loki is running and scrape configs
if we want to add new log files or change anything on the scrape config file - this is the promtail-helm-values.yaml file you can change and do delete the promtail pod and recreate

once you updated the promtail-helm-values.yaml file, delete the existing secret
kubectl delete secret loki-promtail
kubectl create secret generic loki-promtail --from-file=./promtail.yaml
kubectl delete po loki-promtail

Prometheus is a pull-based system: It scrapes metrics from targets (like pods, nodes, services) by querying their endpoints.
It doesn’t need an agent on every node. Instead, it discovers targets via Kubernetes service discovery and scrapes them centrally

Loki itself is a log aggregation system, but it relies on agents like Promtail to collect logs.

Logs are node-local (each node has its own /var/log and container logs). To capture them, you need an agent running on every node.

That’s why Promtail (or Fluentd/Fluent Bit) is deployed as a DaemonSet — ensuring every node has a collector that tails logs and ships them to Loki

promtail.yaml file is the place to update listener port, loki url and scrape configs


helm upgrade --install loki grafana/loki-stack --namespace grafana --set loki.persistence.enabled=true,loki.persistence.storageClassName=default,loki.persistence.size=5Gi
