I learnt one important thing about helm today
for ex. helm chart is installed and respective deployments and services are running
helm revision is 1
I want to update labels on the deployment I can't update the deployment directly for two reasons
1. deployment won't allow to update the labels. its a immutable change
2. helm upgrade will not recognize the label change. it will revert it

How can we do that then?
1. you can update the helm chart values for deployment labels and do helm upgrade. If it fails, then delete the deployment and then do the helm upgrade again
doing helm upgrade without deleting the deployment might fail as this is the immutable change on the deployment.
similarly sometimes what are passing as env to the container from helm values, if you feel its not reflected, then you can delete the deployment and do helm upgrade


envoy gateway api
gateway api CRD's & envoy controller are installed through helm or github repo
envoy controller is running in envoy-gateway-system namespace
gatewayclass - cluster wide resource
gateway - same as app or common namespace
httproute - same as app namespace
install CRDs + controller → Create GatewayClass (cluster-wide) → Create Gateway (namespaced, triggers LB/public IP) → Create HTTPRoute (app-namespaced, routes traffic).
gateway is important


when I apply gateway, envoy gateway controller has created the pod & LB service in envoy-gateway-system
envoy-gateway-6b7544dd65-fgc8d - controller pod
envoy-app-my-gateway-6170702f-78d89fb6f7-hp8z4 - shows app traffic

networking plugin
networking plugin is the one who manages pod network in k8s cluster. k8s has provided CNI to attach the plugin to the cluster to manage the pod networking
control plane pods are static pods gets same ip as node. 
before installing the network plugin pods will get the same ip as the node only if the hostnetwork is set to true. 
so cilium networking plugin when installed it gets the ip same as node and agents are running as daemonsets across all the nodes. 
for other pods hostnetwork is set to false by default. so they use pod network ip.

single container can expose one port or many port. for ex.  nginx container can server http on port 80 & https on port 443. java app might expose rest api on 8080 and metrics endpoint on port 9090.
in that case service can have multiple ports pointing to the same container different protocols
sometimes two container runs on same pod on different ports can also be accessed by a service with multiple port configurations.
but a service should be mapped to single deployment using app labels and selectors. don't use same labels across different deployment. this breaks the abstration. no load balancing will happen

kubectl rollout history deployment/sts/ds/jobs/cronjobs/rs myapp
kubectl rollout undo deploy myapp
kubectl rollout undo deploy myapp --to-revision=1

rollout history only contains the revisions where pod template spec is changed. 
we can revert the changes with rollout undo. 
what can't be reverted via rollout history
external resources like configmap, secret, pv
deployment metadata
scaling replicas
svc or ing changes

--record option shows the actual command in the caused the change in the revision history. it doesn't track anything extra. by default all the pod level changes are tracked and latest 10 revisions are kept in the history

advantages of ingress over LB svc
single public ip in ingress whereas each LB service has its own public ip
no path or host based routing
cost efficiency
TLS terminitstion & security - ingress can handle tls ssl termination centrally
Scalability & maintainability - only one ingress controller to manage instead of multiple LBs

K8s authentication types
============
username & token in a static csv file & passed on to kube api server
certificates signed by k8s CA
3rd party identity provider

service account for external tools
it has token which is a k8s secret type service-account-token of  associated with this service account. 
access the cluster using kubectl --server=apiserveraddress --certificate-authority=cluster-ca-crt --token $token get pod
$token holds the base64 decoded value of token from the secret

need to check entrypoint vs cmd.. in both docker and k8s perspective
